Hey friends, today's sponsor is
Datadog a real time monitoring
platform that unifies metrics logs
and distributed request traces from
your cloud containers and orchestration
software. You can track the
health and performance of your
dynamic containers. Your apps services
with rich visualizations and machine
learning driven alerts. Datadog's new
cluster agent streamlines data collection
from large container clusters and
allows you to auto scale
Kubernetes workloads based on any
metric that you're already collecting
with Datadog. To start monitoring
your container clusters, sign up
for a free trial today.
And Datadog will send you
a free t-shirt visit bitly.com/data
dog shirt to get started.
That's bitly.com/data dog shirt. All
right, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is Hansel minutes. And
today I'm chatting with Matt
Westcott. How are you, sir?
All right, thanks. Absolutely. So
you're a web developer in
your regular life, but you
have a secret superpower that
I think is quite amazing.
You write for the ZX
spectrum. This is a 36
year old computer. Yeah, that's
right. Yeah. That's to come
that's a bit, it's an
obsession. Yeah. Is it just
that computer you're obsessed with,
or are you also obsessed
with BBC micros and commerce?
60 fours and amp? Strads,
that's kind of a passing
interest in the whole range
of them, but the spectrum
was my first love and
that said I would spin
my yet. My name one
retro computing. Well, it's a
quite a big one. So
you need a focus that
describe this for people who,
who are listening, who maybe
haven't seen one before. It
is, it is visually an
unusual looking machine. Yeah, so,
so well it was made
by a Sinclair UK based
company and think that, well,
Sinclair was all always about
cost cutting and making things
sort of miniaturized. And they
set out to create a
computer that was kind of,
I think it's much cheaper
than anything else that was
on the market at the
time. So this was a
micro computer, kind of the
whole, the whole unit was
the keyboard and the, the
computer itself for a single
unit. And it's kind of,
I guess, about the size
of a dinner plate, the
original one, and rather than
having us proper, proper of
hard key keyboards, it was
all this kind of a
rubber mats, I guess, kind
of light, maybe our old
pocket calculators. So it's a,
it's this very compact design.
So this sun shiny black
thing, and then it would
plug into your television sets.
And this was a really
popular bit of kit for,
especially in the UK. It
is definitely a machine that
I think we, we could
look at and dismiss, you
know, you might see it
at a thrift shop and
you say, Oh, this is
just a fancy calculator, but
it was extremely popular and
was, and went along for,
for many years. It wasn't
even discontinued until the early
nineties. Yeah, yeah. That's right.
Something is the, well, there's
a few different models that
came out. And I think
as time went on, they
started looking more and more
like a real computer that's
I think it, yeah, it
really, really captured the imagination
of, of just dead children
learning to program. And, and
there's a thriving game. Is
it something you'd add a
keyboard to like, is like,
I don't think I could
imagine myself programming on this
with the little Chiclets it's
just little squishy gray keys
seems like it would be
exhausting. A few third party
keyboards where you'd to unscrew
the original case in drag
and drop and drop the,
a motherboard in and get
a better keyboard. That way.
Actually, the one that I
started out with was the
spectrum plus, which has proper
plastic keys, but it was
still kind of the plastic
membrane under that. So it
was a bit still short
of being a proper professional
keyboard as you think of
it. But I think that
I, I was spared the,
the, the pain of the,
of the actual rubber one
back in the day. So
there were five or 6 million
of these out in the
world and it hasn't been
inactive. No, no. One's been
making these since 1992, but
there were 40 software titles
released in 2018. That that's
impossible. I mean, it wasn't
all written by you. There
must be a whole huge
community of people excited about
this machine. Yeah. It's it's
yeah. People are interested in
this as a retro thing,
but, well, in my case,
I was, I, I stayed
to interested in it AF
after it had died to
commercial death and it was
just as a very niche
hobbies thing, but yeah. In,
in the last 10 years
or so, he's had a
real resurgence from the nostalgia
crowd and yeah, this lots
of people, mainly around Europe
who are developing for it.
And yeah, it's a great
community to the parcels. Do
you write, like, I assume
it comes with a basic,
basic emulator, but it has
a basic interpreter, but are
you right? You're not writing
in basic, right? No, I
think it's pretty much all
a 80 assembler, 80 assembly.
So what Kind of processor
are we talking about?
so it's a it's, it's
kinda kind of a, it
was a derivative of the
80, 80. That's a, well,
it was a clone by
Xylog. It was the creators
of it. And so where
one brunch turned into a
x86 and the button PC,
but yeah, they, so the
was a micro processor
that still exists to some
extent, but I think it
had its heyday in the
eighties. Yeah. So you said
Zed, we say Z the
Z eight years, that 80
from Xylog was something that
came out in the early
seventies, mid seventies. So this
is a software compatible, Intel,
80, 80. It's like you
said, it's a predecessor to
the 80, 80, 86. And
does it, when you're on
it, does it feel like
a shadow or the beginning
of, of the Intel processors
that we're, that we're using?
Do you, do you think,
like you're looking at a
piece of history, a piece
of Intel history there, even
though it's not, It's, it's
hard to say really I've,
I've never released dig into
x86 assembly to the same
extent that I have with
that AC let's. I think
the, I guess the computer
architecture is back in the
eighties, everyone was very much
doing their own thing. So
it was the wild West
in a way. No one
was really sure what would
become the final standard. This
is yeah. The spectrum and
this at a release of
one out of many possibilities
readily. So you're in the
UK, you're doing your web
thing. You're designing and playing
around with software and as
a hobby on the, on
the ZX spectrum. And then
you get a, you get
a phone call or an
email from, from someone at
Netflix and they just called
you out of the blue.
What happened? It was through
a friend of a friend
on Facebook actually. So I'm
involved in a way it's
a community called the, the
demo. So, you know, to
properly explain a bit about
what that was, but very,
very briefly, it's a community
of people doing like visual
audio, visual, artistic things on
computers, new and old. And
I, a lot of my
spectrum work is doing there's
these little art pieces Deafo
for this community and a
contact as mine, Chris mill
Ray, or the way otherwise
known as a C Trek
CEO just sent me a
Facebook message saying that I've
got this as a producer
from a TV show that
you've definitely heard of. And
they're interested in getting some
spectrum programming done for it.
So yeah, I thought, well,
this is definitely a of
my streets. So at this
point, I didn't know anything
about what the, what the,
the show in, in question
was, but, but yeah, they
put me in touch and
I signed the NDA and
I started getting these small
fragments of information about what's
the, this so and well,
the show turned out to
be a black mirror and
yeah, got, we've got this
very basic outline of what
the show is going to
be about. Namely about that
programmer from the 1980s, creating
video games for the spectrum.
And they were keen to,
as a kind of Easter
egg to take some of
the fictional programs from the,
from the show and make
them into actual real world
spectrum programs. You only, like
you said, you had pieces
of the information and even
until they probably came out,
you still only had fractions
of what was really going
on. Right? Like they didn't
like, say here's the script.
What do you think? They
said, here's a theoretical video
game. That's gonna, that exists.
What as mockups within the
game, within the show that
doesn't the game didn't exist,
right? No. So the, they
created mockups of these games
and I think Adobe premiere,
so everything that is actually
seen in the show is
it's a very clever mockup
of, of the spectrum graphics.
And so I had these
10, 22nd clips of the,
of the games, just the
snippets that you see in,
in the show. And I
was tasked with making that
into a real spectrum game.
Wow. That's gotta be challenging
someone rather than designing the
game. Your specification was like,
here's, here's a Adobe premier
thing, or here's a flash
game. That's not really the
game. And, you know, from
an angle or whatever, like
go and figure this out
and go write us a
game. And they weren't, they
weren't kidding. They wanted it
written for a real ZX
spectrum. Yep. That's right. And
to their credit, it was
a really well done mockup
for 'em. Right. And so
a lot of like when
people are trying to create
something in an eight bit
style, they all just take
some like modern video game
graphics and just scale it
down. But they'd sort of
taken the time to figure
it out the like the
correct screen resolution and right
down to the little graphical
quirks that the spectrum had,
where it's called a color
clash, where if you've got
one Sprite of one color
moving on top of another
one, then the color will
bleed from one Sprite to
another, because there's on the
number of colors you can
have in a particular bit
of space and did some
research. Yeah. Yeah. There's definitely
a people on the production
team with a real lift
the spectrum. Wow. Okay. The
image resolution of a spectrum
is, is two 56 by
one 92. This was kind
of thing that we imagine
a resolution that we'd see,
like on a tiny, tiny,
old led screen, the size
of your thumbnail, but this
is on, and it also
has a kind of a
grid overlay with a quite,
quite a lot of limitations,
limitations in size limitations in
color, not to mention the
color clash that you called
out. Yeah, that's right. So,
yeah, you've got a w
so you have the, the
basic two, five, six by
one, nine two. And that
that's kind of just a
monochrome image with the color
overlay on top. And th
the, the exact limitations are
within an every eight by
eight pixel square, then you
can use two colors out
of a pallet of eight,
and you can also have
the whole that that's square
designated as Brian. Oh, wow.
That is complicated. And, and
they're, they're, they're basically trying
to do all of this
because of limitations. Right. This
is all about constraints. That's
probably why people find coding
for the spectrum. So fun
is that this is an
exercise in constraints. What can
I do with so little?
Yeah, exactly. So, so the,
the, the screen restrictions that
comes out of the, just
the memory limitations, I think
you had 48 kilobytes of
memory in, in the, the
entire thing. And by having
this mostly monochrome screen, that
means that that's only takes
up six K. And, but
yeah, the working in those
limitations, it's a, that's really
what appeals to me. And
it's in a way it's
kind of a bit of
escapism from working with computers
in my day job, because
you can really understand the
machine at their really low
level. You're not in working
at the top of the
stack of abstractions. It's some,
you can get your head
around the entire architecture of
the machine, just in your
head. There's nothing hiding. There's
no, there's no layer of
abstraction. There's no sea runtime,
there's no JavaScript. It's just
you and a piece of
hardware and some registers that
you can, you can play
with. Yeah, exactly. And it
means that you're kind of
free to kind of invent
ways of doing things, trying
to you use the 18
instruction, setting, creative ways to,
to squeeze out a bit
more performance, push more pixels
than you normally would be
able to. And just by
doing things in sort of
nonstandard ways. So yeah. Kind
of breaking the rules of
structured programming. So yeah, it's
really a sandbox way yet.
And anything is possible early.
They pull out more performance.
It might, it might seem
odd for people to listen
and think like, well, what
kind of performance are you
going to get from this?
But that's really the, the
essence of the whole demo
scene is to see what
can I do with smaller
and smaller constraints? What can
I do in three K
and four K and Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. There's all kinds
of different limitations. So like
the size limitations working with,
with the limited hardware, like
the spectrum and yeah, it's,
it's, let's say it's kind
of in way escapism from
what you would do at
what you'd be working on
in some law to mainstream
programming. Hey folks, you're a
very good developer, probably regardless.
You do write bugs. That's
unavoidable. What is affordable is
wasting time trying to track
down the cause of those
bugs century.io provides full stack
error tracking that lets you
monitor and fix problems. In
real time, you can see
the severity and the scope
of the error get immediate
access to the stack, trace,
connect the problem to the
commit that caused it and
fix it without delay century.
It's a name so common
that they have to include
the top level domain in
their advertising to make sure
you remember it. century.io, that
century dot I O open
source, full stack web apps,
native apps, mobile games, smart
oven mitts. If you can
program it, they can make
it far easier to fix
any errors you encounter with
it. Your code may be
broken, let's fix it together.
Visit century.io. Was there anything,
when you were writing this,
that you thought wasn't possible,
or was it a straightforward
game as spectrum games go?
And in this case it
was, it was fairly straightforward.
I think normally when I'm
doing a demo, seeing things
and trying to push the
limits, then it's because I'm,
I am the one that's
deciding, this is what I'm
going to create. And this
is I, this is my
plan of attack. It's kind
of a bit of a
different approach when you're given
something to create a and
so that was kind of
a bit more constrained than
I would usually be if
I was left to my
own devices. How much time
did you spend on this?
Is this something you bang
out in a weekend or
is this many weeks of
work? I think it was,
well, it was Mo mostly
it was after I was
in my evenings. I think
it was maybe two or
three weeks of evenings. Oh,
that's not too bad. Quite
a lot of it. It
was, there's a few things
I'm not really, I taken
this, this approach before. Usually
if I'm doing demo scene
things where it's very focused
on just this specific visual
effects and everything that you
you're able to really plan
out exactly what's happening on
screen at any moment, but
with a game, because it's
always variable, how much action
there is on screen, then
it's, that's ended up being
kind of a different approach.
And so I had to
rethink how to deal with
clearing and reprinting sprites and
making sure that it didn't
clash with where, how the
screen was updating. And so
there was quite a lot
of rethinking the way I
usually do things in that
respect. How did people load
their applications? There's no SD
cards, there's no hard drive.
What is the input output
of a, of a spectrum?
Well, back in the day,
at least it was a
cassette tapes. You would have
these tapes with the five
minutes or so of these
high-pitched bleeps that sort of
encoded the binary data. And,
and since I'd say this,
the spectrum, it was a
very much a cost cutting
thing. The idea is that
you would just take your
tape recorder that you had
laying around the house and
just, and just plug that
into the spectrum. And you
would hit play and wait
five minutes for this whole
thing to load into the,
into the memory. And at
the end of that, you
would have the game. And
I think one thing that
was quite unique to the
spectrum and thinking quite a
few of different microcomputers how
they used cassette tapes, but
the spectrum was kind of
unique in that you actually
heard these bleeps while it
was loading. And I think
there's some speculation that that
was more a hardware bug
than something intentional. But, but
yeah, it did mean that
you had this very anyone
who was loading games on
this thing, they would, it
would be a very familiar
statement. This sort of B,
B lots of statements. Sometimes
when I'm trying to explain
how this works, I use
the idea of, of modems.
Is it almost like a
one way modem? It's that
it's almost like you called,
like the computer called somewhere
and it played back to
them except the own. It's
only one way it's going
from the tape directly into
the, into the device. Yeah.
I think that would be
a, an accurate way to
describe it. Yeah. Yeah. So
it's whistling and it's going
doing it's it's high bit
and it's low bit based
on the tones. That was
how it was done in
the eighties. But you were
writing this in a text.
How did you go from
a text editor to a
tape? And what, how did
you deliver this to them?
So the, so the D
developing it, I I'm mostly,
well, pretty much exclusively using
an emulator on the PC
and this, the, there are
a sort of utility programs
that, that deal with the
file formats on, on the,
with the emulator that kind
of simulate the Tepe image
and can convert that to
just a wave file. So,
and yeah, I'd say the,
the development I do, it's
pretty much exclusively on, on
emulators. It's a certain more
convenient way of working and
bots. They, these, these, they,
they do have support for
loading and saving as audio
files or the various disc
systems that existed for, for
the spectrum over time, You
do the work on a
modern PC, you test it
in an emulator, you save
it as a dot tap
or dot tape file. And
then you can also export
it as a wave effectively
a sound file that could
then theoretically be put on
a real tape if someone
wanted to load this on
it. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Okay.
Dude, our spectrums hacked is
such that you can feed
stuff into the spectrum faster
than a real tape, or
is if you wanted to
go and do a final
production test on a physical
real machine, would you really
export record to a tape,
play it back and wait
five minutes. Well, over time
there's been plenty of more
advanced storage systems for the
spectrum. So these days there
are SD cards out on
interfaces. So it's most of
the time, I think you
just take these emulator files,
just drop them onto the
SD card. And there's a
custom phone West of the
spectrum that can load straight
from that to, but yeah,
over time, this is something
that's evolved quite a lot
for quite a long time.
In like in the 1990s,
I was working with floppies
and yeah, it's so it's
something that the, the, the
tech, the technology, the spectrum
has been catching up with
with modern, not it wasn't
hardware in its own way.
It's so wonderful to see
all of these older pieces
of hardware get little hacks,
little mods, I've got a,
we have Nintendo, we, and,
you know, they can load
off of the SD card.
I've seen a USB port
added to a, a gold
star 3d, Oh, everyone wants
to make it nice and
easy so that someone can
get involved in retro computing
or retro gaming. Yeah, it's
a, well, when I think
back to the development process,
before I, before I moved
on to emulators and the,
well, the thing with developing
in assembler is that if
something, if you, if there
is a book, then there's
not really any way of
just of just stopping with
an error message and then
going back into like, fixing,
finding your book that it
would just hard crash the
machine. So, so well in
the worst case that that
would mean that you'd have
to spend five minutes loading
everything from tape all over
it again, or, well, this
is again where the, the,
the more modern hardware accessories
over time really helps. If
I had a disk system
where you could save a
snapshot of the memory to
desk before running a program,
and then if it crashed,
then you'd still be able
to load that snapshots out.
But I think being able
to do everything instantly through
the emulator, just have a
single command that can compile
everything from a text file,
and then just fire up
the emulator. I think it's
a real luxury compared to
what we used to have.
Yeah. Watching the character in
the black mirror Bandersnatch show,
there was just a lot
of him staring at the
screen with his head in
his hands, which I feel
like as someone who developed
software in the eighties that
really represents, you know, very,
very accurately what it felt
like there was no internet,
there was him a stack
of books and he was
staring at a screen looking
sad for a very long
time. Yeah. And well, I
think it's worth mentioning that.
I think they used a
bit of artistic license in
the show in that they
showed him programming in basic.
I think that's a, I'd
say acceptable artistic license with
making programming, look how the
audience might expect it to
look, Indeed. It would have
been much more, much less
glamorous at we'd been running
it, doing it in assembler.
Yeah. Where did they hide
this then? So how did
people find this game? So
there's, you know, they could
have just mocked the whole
thing up and called it
a day. So it's so
the, they, they stashed this.
It was at the, at
the end of the, it
was one of the endings
because the, the actual process
for getting to this particular
ending, it's kind of a
bit vague, but they, they,
there is the scene of
the, of the main character.
It's, it's a kind of
call back to an early
scene where he's on the
bus, listening to music on
his Walkman, but it's rather
than putting a tape of
music. And he, he, of
his, his demo of his
program in, and starts listening
to these high pitch and
bleeps and well it's people
as, as this is a
kind of a very distinctive
sound to a small fragment
of the audience. So I
think what, once people discovered
this scene, I think there
are some, there's a certain
portion of the audience where
they had this light bulb
moment of, ah, I know
what this is. And so
yeah, they found the right
setup to take that audio
and feed it into, into
the spectrum. It's so wonderful
that in 2019, in, in
modern television right now, you
realize that if that had
just been honestly screeching and
nothing had been hidden there,
I think we would have
all been disappointed. And it's
so wonderful that people like
black mirror or mr. Robot
like puts the work in
and hires people like you
to do fun Easter eggs
like this, because it, it
helps us engage in such
a deeper way with the,
with the medium. Yeah. It's
a, it feels amazing to
me that I am getting
this. Yeah. Paige work doing
spectrum developments in, in 2018,
2019, but yeah, it's, I
think, yeah, obviously the, the
creators of the shows they
grew up in this area
as well, and this, there's
obviously some, a real passion
for the old computers there
and, you know, it's, it's
great for them to be
dragged along with that same
enthusiasm. So were there two
programs written because the screeching
noise and Bandersnatch demo, isn't
actually the game, right. Because
that would have required a
lot more audio. Is it
our code that points to
the game? Yeah, that's right.
So that's one bit of
briefing I got from the
producers was that, okay, whatever
we do, the bit of
audio that plays in the
show, it can't be longer
than one minute. So I
see that that would have
been quite tricky if that
had been the entire code
of the game. So their
suggestion was that the audio
that you hit that plays
in the show would just
display this QR code. And
so this was at the
point where I was able
to sort of upsell them
a bit and said, well,
since I'm used to doing
these like visual effects on
the spectrum, I thought, well,
rather than it just displaying
a static QR code, then
how about add, add a
bit of like VHS style
glitching and to kind of
make it a bit more
of the black mirror ambiance.
And, and so that was
a lot of fun to
do is to try and
create these kind of fake
VCR noise effects. And how
long does it take, if
you did the entire game,
you said three, four, three,
or four or five minutes
of audio, something like that.
Yes. It's well, this, this
is one place where we,
we can take advantage of
the lusts of 20 or
30 years of spectrum development.
So there's a people have
come up with a sort
of compression systems that, where
you're compressing things on the
PC and then unpacking them
on, on the spectrum. So
think things are a bit
more efficient than they would
have been for. Someone's making
this entirely on the spectrum
back in the eighties. But
yeah, I think it would
have been something I add
two or three minutes maybe
for the nosedive game. And
the nosedive game is something
like 13,000 bytes. And the
average transfer rate is 300
bod or about 38 bytes
per second. So you can
figure it would take a
while. Yeah. Something like that.
Yeah. Fantastic. So people can
follow you on Twitter at
Twitter slash gas, manic, M
a N I C I'll
put links to this in
the show notes, and you
can go to Tucker soft.net
and play a nose dive,
and O H Zed, D
Y V E. And hopefully
they can go out there
and Google and learn all
about the, the exciting ZX
spectrum community that I hope
has been re-energized by this
bit of nostalgia that they
inserted into the black mirror
episode, spinous, lots of those
in the spectrum scene, as
well as, and the black
mirror sound scene. So, yeah,
it's been really exciting to
see that over the last
few weeks. Yeah. Fantastic. Thanks
so much, Matt. Wescott for
chatting with me today. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we'll see
you again next week. .